
User-visible changes in "magic-wormhole":

## Release 0.6.3 (29-Feb-2016)

Mostly internal changes:

* twisted.transit was added, so Twisted-based applications can use it now.
  This includes Producer/Consumer -based flow control. The Transit protocol
  and API are documented in docs/transit.md .
* The transit relay server can blur filesizes, rounding them to some
  roughly-logarithmic interval.
* Use --relay-helper="" to disable use of the transit relay entirely,
  limiting the file transfer to direct connections.
* The new --hide-progress option disables the progress bar.
* Made some windows-compatibility fixes, but all tests do not yet pass.

## Release 0.6.2 (12-Jan-2016)

* the server can now "blur" usage information: this turns off HTTP logging,
  and rounds timestamps to coarse intervals
* `wormhole server usage` now shows Transit usage too, not just Rendezvous

## Release 0.6.1 (03-Dec-2015)

* `wormhole` can now send/receive entire directories. They are zipped before
  transport.
* Python 3 is now supported for async (Twisted) library use, requiring at
  least Twisted-15.5.0.
* A bug was fixed which prevented py3-based clients from using the relay
  transit server (not used if the two sides can reach each other directly).
* The `--output-file=` argument was finally implemented, which allows the
  receiver to override the filename that it writes. This may help scripted
  usage.
* Support for Python-2.6 was removed, since the recent Twisted-15.5.0 removed
  it too. It might still work, but is no longer automatically tested.
* The transit relay now implements proper flow control (Producer/Consumer),
  so it won't buffer the entire file when the sender can push data faster
  than the receiver can accept it. The sender should now throttle down to the
  receiver's maximum rate.

## Release 0.6.0 (23-Nov-2015)

* Add key-confirmation message so "wormhole send" doesn't hang when the
  receiver mistypes the code.
* Fix `wormhole send --text -` to read the text message from stdin. `wormhole
  receive >outfile` works, but currently appends an extra newline, which may
  be removed in a future release.
* Arrange for 0.4.0 senders to print an error message when connecting to a
  current (0.5.0) server, instead of an ugly stack trace. Unfortunately 0.4.0
  receivers still display the traceback, since they don't check the welcome
  message before using a missing API. 0.5.0 and 0.6.0 will do better.
* Improve channel deallocation upon error.
* Inform the server of our "mood" when the connection closes, so it can track
  the rate of successful/unsuccessful transfers. The server DB now stores a
  summary of each transfer (waiting time and reported outcome).
* Rename (and deprecate) one server API (the non-EventSource form of "get"),
  leaving it in place until after the next release. 0.5.0 clients should
  interoperate with both the 0.6.0 server and 0.6.0 clients, but eventually
  they'll stop working.

## Release 0.5.0 (07-Oct-2015)

* Change the CLI to merge send-file with send-text, and receive-file with
  receive-text. Add confirmation before accepting a file.
* Change the remote server API significantly, breaking compatibility with
  0.4.0 peers. Fix EventSource to match W3C spec and real browser behavior.
* Add py3 (3.3, 3.4, 3.5) compatibility for blocking calls (but not Twisted).
* internals
 * Introduce Channel and ChannelManager to factor out the HTTP/EventSource
   technology in use (making room for WebSocket or Tor in the future).
 * Change app-visible API to allow multiple message phases.
 * Change most API arguments from bytes to unicode strings (appid, URLs,
   wormhole code, derive_key purpose string, message phase). Derived keys are
   bytes, of course.
* Add proper unit tests.

## Release 0.4.0 (22-Sep-2015)

This changes the protocol (to a symmetric form), breaking compatibility with
0.3.0 peers. Now both blocking-style and Twisted-style use a symmetric
protocol, and the two sides do not need to figure out (ahead of time) which
one goes first. The internal layout was rearranged, so applications that
import wormhole must be updated.

## Release 0.3.0 (24-Jun-2015)

Add preliminary Twisted support, only for symmetric endpoints (no
initator/receiver distinction). Lacks code-entry tab-completion. May still
leave timers lingering. Add test suite (only for Twisted, so far).

Use a sqlite database for Relay server state, to survive reboots with less
data loss. Add "--advertise-version=" to "wormhole relay start", to override
the version we recommend to clients.

## Release 0.2.0 (10-Apr-2015)

Initial release: supports blocking/synchronous asymmetric endpoints
(Initiator on one side, Receiver on the other). Codes can be generated by
Initiator, or created externally and passed into both (as long as they start
with digits: NNN-anything).
